All right, so you might agree that writing
less code feels good, and eliminating the clanky constructs
after finding a class than having to execute a method on it
for simple functions might be an advantage.
Well the helloable interface in these examples
meets the requirements for a functional interface.
And there's the interface on screen.
Now, pulled straight from the oracle java specification,
functional interfaces are described as follows.
"Functional interfaces provide target types
for lambda expressions and method references.
Each functional interface has a single abstract method,
called the functional method for that functional interface,
to which the lambda expression's parameter and return types
are matched or adapted.
Functional interfaces can provide a target type
in multiple contexts, such as assignment context,
method invocation, or cast context."
So in other words, any where you can use an interface type
in code you can replace the instantiated object
which might have been used with a lambda expression.
All right, so let's look at some
basic lambda expressions and texts.
So two links you'll find useful here, are on screen
but also in the resources section
so really good to just follow up
and make sure you understand lambda expressions really well.
But in particular, I like this image
that I've got on screen here
because it very quickly tells you what you need to know
about writing a lambda expression.
So we've got the argument list on the left,
the arrow token in the middle,
and the body on the right hand side.
So let's now discuss those three parts.
So a lambda expression is composed of three parts.
Firstly, the parameters, the argument list.
Well this is a comma-separated list of formal parameters
enclosed in parentheses.
You can omit the data type of the parameters
in a lambda expression.
If you include data types, you must declare a data type
for each parameter.
In addition, you can omit the parentheses
if there's only one parameter.
If you have no parameters, you represent this with an empty
parentheses set.
And you can see an example there with no parentheses
that have been passed.
All right, the second part of the lambda expression
is the arrow token.
That's a dash and a greater than sign.
And the third part is the body.
So the body can consist of a single expression.
If you specify a single expression,
then the Java runtime evaluates the expression
and then returns its value.
An example there, p -> p.getName()=="RALPH"
You do not have to enclose
a void method invocation in braces.
For example, the following is a valid lambda expression.
S -> System.out.println(s)
Thirdly, a body can consist of a statement block.
A return statement is not an expression.
In a lambda expression you must enclose statements in braces
the left or right curly braces.
An example there p ->
So note that lambda expressions
resemble method declarations.
In fact you can consider lambda expressions
to be anonymous methods, methods without a name,
and no longer requiring an anonymous class to wrap them.
Sometimes a lambda expression does nothing
but call an existing method.
In these cases, you can use a method reference.
They're compact, easy to read lambda expressions
for methods that already have a name.
You can see the syntax for a method reference,
System.out::println.
A method reference can completely replace
a lambda expression with an arrow token,
if the method referred to meets the requirements
for the functional interface method.
All right, so let's look at some examples
of syntactically correct parameter declarations
in lambda expressions.
So on the left we've got there valid lambda expressions,
the first one () -> System.out.println("Hello").
And the notes there, no parameter syntax,
parentheses required,
and the parentheses in the parameter list declaration
are required.
Next we've got a -> a + 1, it's a single parameter syntax,
no parentheses are required, and the parentheses in the
parameter list declaration are optional.
Third, we've got (a) -> a + 1,
that's a single parameter syntax,
parentheses valid but optional,
but I've marked that as optional.
Next we've got (int a) -> a + 1,
that's a single parameter syntax specifying the data type,
and in that scenario the parentheses are required.
We've got (var a) -> a + 1,
that's a single parameter syntax
with Local Variable Type Inference,
and parentheses are required for that.
Next we've got (int a, int b) -> a + b,
and multiple parameter syntax hid there with declared types
and all parameters must specify a type,
and we need parentheses.
Next, (a, b) -> a + b,
that's multiple parameter syntax with no types,
if you're not specifying data types
for this one you must omit them for all,
parentheses are required in this scenario.
And lastly, (var a, var b) -> a + b.
Multiple parameter syntax with Local Variable Type Inference
you must use var for all parameters if you use it for one,
and parentheses are required in that example.
All right, now let's look at some examples of syntactically
incorrect parameter declarations in lambda expressions.
The first one, we've got -> System.out.println("Hello"),
the no parameter syntax, parameters required,
and we obviously haven't got any there.
Next we've got int a -> a + 1,
it's for a single parameter syntax specifying data type,
parentheses are required and they're obviously not there.
Next var a -> a + 1, single parameter syntax
with Local Variable Type Inference, parentheses are required
and aren't there.
And next we've got (int a, b) -> a + b,
multiple parameter syntax with declared types,
all parameters in that scenario must specify a type,
parentheses are required in that scenario.
a, b -> a + b, multiple parameter syntax with no types,
you must use parentheses and obviously we're not
in that scenario.
Next we've got (a, var b) -> a + b,
that's multiple parameter syntax with
Local Variable Type Inference,
you must use var for all parameters if you use it for one,
and parentheses are required in that scenario.
Next we've got (int a, var b) -> a + b,
problem there is you can't mix var with actual data types
and parentheses are required in that scenario,
but in this case obviously, it's an error.
Right now let's look at some examples
of syntactically correct body declarations
in lambda expressions.
So we've got () -> System.out.println("Hello").
A single line with a statement, not an expression,
is valid for methods which have a void return type.
Next we've got () -> isTrue && isPlausible.
A single line lambda expression must be an expression
which evaluates to the correct return type or co-variant,
if the method has a return type.
Next we've got (a) -> ;.
So using return requires the use of curly braces
for the expression body.
Using curly braces requires a return statement
if the method has a return type.
And all statements must be terminated with a semi-colon.
And next we've got (a) -> { if (a % 2 == 0)
a = 100; return a + 2; }.
Multiple statements are permitted in our curly braces,
every statement must be terminated with a semi-colon.
The last one there we've got
(a) -> { int modValue = 2; if (a % modValue == 0)
a = 100; return a + 2; };
and the point there is
you can declare local variables in the expression.
All right, and just before we finish the video now,
two quick examples of a syntactically incorrect
body declarations in lambda expressions.
The first one, () -> return 1.
So using return requires the use of curly braces.
And the next one, (a) -> { if (a % 2 == 0) a = 100,
return a + 2; }.
Trying to use a comma to separate statements,
you have to use a semi-colon.
All right, so let's end the video here.
In the next one, I will start the ball rolling
by looking at a single parameter lambda expression.
See you in the next video.